Feat(cv_deploy): Support environment variables as a way to manage proxy settings (#6082)
aristanetworks/avd: docs/howto/cv_deploy/proxy.md

<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) 2026 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

> # Proxy server support in cv_deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Proxy Server Support in cv_deploy
```

The `arista.avd.cv_deploy` role supports connecting to CloudVision through an [HTTP CONNECT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_tunnel#HTTP_CONNECT_method) proxy server, with or without basic authentication.

!!! Warning

>     Authentication credentials (when used) are sent to the proxy server using ***HTTP Basic authentication*** over non-encrypted HTTP transport (credentials are only `Base64` encoded, not encrypted). Proxy server credentials can be exposed by intercepting and analyzing raw TCP/IP traffic between AVD and Proxy server. Please always use other filtering and identification mechanisms (like HTTP filtering based on the client's SRC IP, requested destination domains, etc.) to limit the security risks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Authentication credentials (when used) are sent to the proxy server via ***HTTP Basic authentication*** over an unencrypted HTTP connection (credentials are only Base64-encoded, not encrypted). Proxy server credentials can be exposed by intercepting and analyzing raw TCP/IP traffic between AVD and the proxy server. Please always use additional filtering and identification mechanisms (such as HTTP filtering based on the client’s SRC IP, requested destination domains, etc.) to mitigate security risks.
```

>     It is important to note that plain HTTP is used by AVD only for the initial CONNECT request to establish the tunnel with the CloudVision through proxy server. Once the TCP tunnel to CloudVision through proxy server is active, all subsequent AVD communication — including both REST and gRPC calls — is protected within a secure TLS session(s) established between AVD and CloudVision ***inside*** the TCP proxy tunnel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It is important to note that AVD uses plain HTTP only for the initial CONNECT request to establish a tunnel to CloudVision through the proxy server. After the TCP tunnel to CloudVision through the proxy server is active, all subsequent AVD communication — including both REST and gRPC calls — is protected within a secure TLS session(s) established between AVD and CloudVision ***inside*** the TCP proxy tunnel.
```

There are two ways to enable proxy server for `cv_deploy`: explicit and via environment variables.

## Configure proxy settings explicitly

To enable proxy server explicitly, set `proxy_host`. Setting `proxy_port` (port `TCP/8080` will be used by default), `proxy_username` and `proxy_password` is optional.

If valid `proxy_host` (must be non-empty string) and `proxy_port` (1-65535) are set, `cv_deploy` will ignore (for both REST and gRPC calls) any proxy-related environment variables (`https_proxy`/`HTTPS_PROXY`/`all_proxy`/`ALL_PROXY`/`no_proxy`/`NO_PROXY`) and will force all REST and gRPC egress connections through this proxy.

> Example of the configuration to use unauthenticated HTTP proxy using CONNECT method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example configuration to use an unauthenticated HTTP proxy using the CONNECT method:
```

```yaml
proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
proxy_port: 3128
```

> Example of the configuration to use authenticated HTTP proxy using CONNECT method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example configuration to use an authenticated HTTP proxy using the CONNECT method:
```

```yaml
proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
proxy_port: 3128
proxy_username: "avd_proxy_user"
proxy_password: "avd_proxy_password"
```

!!! None

    All special symbols present in the explicitly passed proxy username and password will be automatically encoded by AVD.

    Example:

    ```yaml
    proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
    proxy_port: 3128
    proxy_username: "p:r/o$x@yuser"
    proxy_password: "p:r/o$x@ypassword"
    ```

>     will be equal to setting the following via the environment variable: `http://p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40yuser:p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40ypassword@proxy.local.domain:3128`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Will be equal to setting the following via the environment variable: `http://p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40yuser:p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40ypassword@proxy.local.domain:3128`
```

## Configure proxy settings using environment variables

> If proxy-related settings are not passed to `cv_deploy` explicitly, `cv_deploy` will try to discover usable proxy server (scheme is `http`, host is a non-empty string, port is in the range 1-65535) using environment variables in the following order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If proxy-related settings are not passed to `cv_deploy` explicitly, `cv_deploy` will try to discover a usable proxy server (scheme is `http`, host is a non-empty string, port is in the range 1-65535) using environment variables in the following order:
```

> 1. (Step 1) Check if proxy bypass is requested for CloudVision

Reviewer: Mentioning Step 1 and Step 2 seems unnecessary in an ordered list

Author: True, removed `(Step x)`

>     ```mermaid

Reviewer: I'm also not sure if a user needs the decision tree when setting proxy settings, this could be represented by which takes precedence but the team may feel different.

Example configuration to use an unauthenticated HTTP proxy using the CONNECT method:

```yaml
proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
proxy_port: 3128
```

Example configuration to use an authenticated HTTP proxy using the CONNECT method:

```yaml
proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
proxy_port: 3128
proxy_username: "avd_proxy_user"
proxy_password: "avd_proxy_password"
```

!!! Note

    All special symbols present in the explicitly passed proxy username and password will be automatically encoded by AVD.

    Example:

    ```yaml
    proxy_host: proxy.local.domain
    proxy_port: 3128
    proxy_username: "p:r/o$x@yuser"
    proxy_password: "p:r/o$x@ypassword"
    ```

    Will be equal to setting the following via the environment variable: `http://p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40yuser:p%3Ar%2Fo%24x%40ypassword@proxy.local.domain:3128`

## Configure proxy settings using environment variables

If proxy-related settings are not passed to `cv_deploy` explicitly, `cv_deploy` will try to discover a usable proxy server (scheme is `http`, host is a non-empty string, port is in the range 1-65535) using environment variables in the following order:

> 1. Check if proxy bypass is requested for CloudVision

Reviewer 2: I feel this table would work better and ask less from the reader:

```
• | Priority | Setting | Behavior |
  | -------- | ------- | -------- |
  | 1 | Explicit `proxy_host`, `proxy_port`, `proxy_username`, `proxy_password` | Explicit settings win and ignore all proxy-related
  environment variables. |
  | 2 | `no_proxy` | If CloudVision matches, `cv_deploy` does not use a proxy. |
  | 3 | `NO_PROXY` | Used only if `no_proxy` is not set. If CloudVision matches, `cv_deploy` does not use a proxy. |
  | 4 | `https_proxy` | First proxy server candidate. |
  | 5 | `HTTPS_PROXY` | Used only if `https_proxy` is not set. |
  | 6 | `all_proxy` | Used only if no HTTPS proxy variable is set. |
  | 7 | `ALL_PROXY` | Last proxy server candidate. |
```

Reviewer 2: and then remove the very nice but more requiring mermaid graph

        C -- Yes --> D{"'HTTPS_PROXY'\ncontent valid?"}
        D -- Yes --> UseProxy2(["Use 'HTTPS_PROXY'"])
        D -- No --> Exc2(["Raise exception"])
        E -- No --> G{"'ALL_PROXY' is set and\nis a non-empty string?"}
        E -- Yes --> F{"'all_proxy'\ncontent valid?"}
        F -- Yes --> UseProxy3(["Use 'all_proxy'"])
        F -- No --> Exc3(["Raise exception"])
        G -- No --> NoProxy(["Do not use proxy"])
        G -- Yes --> H{"'ALL_PROXY'\ncontent valid?"}
        H -- Yes --> UseProxy4(["Use 'ALL_PROXY'"])
        H -- No --> Exc4(["Raise exception"])
    ```

Examples below show values that can be used for `https_proxy`/`HTTPS_PROXY`/`all_proxy`/`ALL_PROXY` environment variables to influence proxy server settings in `cv_deploy`:

```code
# Assuming 10.10.10.10 and proxy-server.local being examples of the proxy servers
http://10.10.10.10:8081
http://proxy-server.local:8081
http://user1:pass1@10.10.10.10:8081
http://user1:pass1@proxy-server.local:8081
```

!!! Note

    When setting proxy credentials via environment variables, make sure to quote all special symbols (like `:`, `@`, etc. ) otherwise such proxy URI string will be invalid.

> Examples below show invalid values of `https_proxy`/`HTTPS_PROXY`/`all_proxy`/`ALL_PROXY` environment variables which will be ignored by `cv_deploy`:

Reviewer 2: this is not accurate with the mermaid chart and the code as we would raise exceptions upon wrong values

Author: thanks, this is matching original "graceful" logic which was later changed to strict (fail on error). Reworded ths sentense
